PIECES OF EIGHT
Owing to the count of the vessel, the masts hung far out over the water, and from my perch
on the cross-trees I had nothing below me but the surface of the bay. Hans, who was
not so far up, was in consequence nearer to the ship, and fell between me and the bulwarks.
He rose once to the surface in a lather of foam and blood, and then sank again for good.
As the water settled, I could see him lying huddled together on the clean, bright sand
in the shadow of the vessel's sides. A fish or two whipped past his body. Sometimes by
the quivering of the water he appeared to move a little, as if he were trying to rise.
But he was dead enough for all that, being both shot and drowned, and was food for fish
in the very place where he had designed my slaughter.
I was no sooner certain of this than I began to feel sick, faint, and terrified. The hot
blood was running over my back and chest. The dirk where it had pinned my shoulder to
like a hot iron. Yet it was not so much these real sufferings that distressed me. For these
it seemed to me I could bear without a murmur. It was the horror I had upon my mind of falling
from the cross-trees into that still green water beside the body of the coxswain.
I clung with both hands until my nails ached, and I shut my eyes as if to cover up the peril.
Gradually my mind came back again, my pulses quieted down to a more natural time, and I
was once again in possession of myself.
It was my first thought to pluck forth the dirk, but either it stuck too hard or my nerve
failed me, and I desisted with a violent shudder. Oddly enough that very shudder did the business.
The knife, in fact, had come the nearest in the world to missing me altogether. It held
me by a mere pinch of skin, and this the shudder tore away. The blood ran down the faster,
to be sure, but I was my own master again, and only tacked to the mast by my coat and
These last I broke through with a sudden jerk, and then regained the deck by the starboard
shrouds, for nothing in the world would I have again ventured, shaken as I was, upon
the overhanging port shrouds from which Israel had so lately fallen.
I went below and did what I could for my wound. It pained me a good deal and still bled freely,
but it was neither deep nor dangerous, nor did it greatly gall me when I used my arm.
Then I looked around me, and as the ship was now, in a sense, my own, I began to think
of clearing it from its last passenger, the dead man O'Brien. He had pitched, as I have
said, against the bulwarks, where he lay like some horrible ungainly sort of puppet, life-size
indeed, but how different from life's colour or life's comeliness. In that position I could
easily have my way with him, and as the habit of tragical adventures had worn off almost
all my terror for the dead, I took him by the waist as if he had been a sack of bran,
and with one good heave tumbled him overboard. He went in with a sounding plunge, the red
cap came off and remained floating on the surface, and as soon as the splash subsided
I could see him and Israel lying side by side, both wavering with the tremulous movement
of the water. O'Brien, though still quite a young man, was very bold. There he lay with
that bold head across the knees of the man who had killed him, and the quick fishes steering
to and fro over both. I was now alone upon the ship. The tide had just turned. The sun
was within so few degrees of setting that already the shadow of the pines upon the western
shore began to reach right across the anchorage and fall in patterns on the deck. The evening
breeze had sprung up, and though it was well warded off by the hill with the two peaks
upon the east, the cordage had begun to sing a little softly to itself, and the idle sails
a rattle to and fro. I began to see a danger to the ship. The jibs I speedily doused and
brought tumbling to the deck, but the mainsail was a harder matter. Of course when the schooner
canted over the boom had a swing outboard, and the cap of it and a foot or two of sail
hung even under the water. I thought this made it still more dangerous, yet the strain
was so heavy that I half feared to meddle. At last I got my knife and cut the halyards.
The peak dropped instantly, a great belly of loose canvas floated broad upon the water,
and since, pull as I liked, I could not budge the down-haul, that was the extent of what
I could accomplish. For the rest, the Hispaniola must trust a luck like myself. By this time
the whole anchorage had fallen into shadow, the last rays I remember falling through a
glade of the wood and shining bright as jewels on the flowery mantle of the wreck. It began
to be chill, the tide was rapidly fleeting sea-wood, the schooner settling more and
more on her beam ends. I scrambled forward and looked over. It seemed shallow enough,
and holding the cut-houser in both hands for last security, I let myself drop softly overboard.
The water scarcely reached my waist, the sand was firm and covered with ripple marks, and
I waded ashore in great spirits, leaving the Hispaniola on her side, with her mainsail
trailing wide upon the surface of the bay. About the same time, the sun went fairly down
and the breeze whistled low in the dusk among the tossing pines. At least and at last I
was off the sea, nor had I returned thence empty-handed. There lay the schooner, clear
at last from buccaneers and ready for our own men to board and get to sea again. I had
nothing nearer my fancy than to get home to the stockade and boast of my achievements.
Possibly I might be blamed a bit for my truantry, but the recapture of the Hispaniola was a
wrenching answer, and I hoped that even Captain Smollett would confess I had not lost my time.
So thinking, and in famous spirits, I began to set my face homeward for the blockhouse
and my companions. I remembered that the most easterly of the rivers which drain into Captain
Kidd's anchorage ran from the two-peaked hill upon my left, and I bent my course in
that direction that I might pass the stream whilst it was small. The wood was pretty open,
and keeping along the lower spurs, I had soon turned the corner of that hill, and was not
long after waded to the mid-garve across the water-course. This brought me near to
where I had encountered Ben Gunn, the maroon, and I walked more circumspectly, keeping an
eye on every side. The dusk had come nigh-hand completely, and as I opened out the cleft
between the two peaks, I became aware of a wavering glow against the sky, where, as I
judged, the man of the island was cooking his supper before a roaring fire, and yet
I wondered in my heart that he should show himself so careless, for if I could see this
radiance, might it not reach the eyes of Silver himself, where he camped upon the shore
among the marshes?
Gradually the night fell blacker. It was all I could do to guide myself even roughly towards
my destination. The double hill behind me and the spy-glass on my right hand loomed
faint and fainter. The stars were few and pale, and in the low ground where I wandered,
I kept tripping among bushes and rolling into sandy pits. Suddenly a kind of brightness
fell about me. I looked up. A pale glimmer of moonbeams had alighted on the summit of
the spy-glass, and soon after I saw something broad and silvery moving low down behind the
trees, and knew that the moon had risen. With this to help me, I passed rapidly over what
remained to me of my journey, and sometimes walking, sometimes running, impatiently drew
near to the stockade. Yet as I began to thread the grove that lies before it, I was not so
thoughtless but that I slacked my pace and went a trifle warily. It would have been a
poor end of my adventures to get shot down by my own party and mistake.
The moon was climbing higher and higher. Its light began to fall here and there in masses
through the more open districts of the wood, and right in front of me a glow of a different
colour appeared among the trees. It was red and hot, and now and again it was a little
darkened, as it were the embers of a bonfire smouldering.
For the life of me, I could not think what it might be.
At last I came right down upon the borders of the clearing. The western end was already
steeped in moonshine. The rest, and the block-house itself, still lay in a black shadow checkered
with long silvery streaks of light. On the other side of the house an immense fire had
burned itself into clear embers and shed a steady red reverberation contrasted strongly
with the mellow paleness of the moon. There was not a soul stirring, nor a sound beside
the noises of the breeze.
I stopped, with much wonder in my heart, and perhaps a little terror also. It had not been
our way to build great fires. We were, indeed by the captain's orders, somewhat niggardly
of firewood, and I began to fear that something had gone wrong while I was absent.
I stole round by the eastern end, keeping close in shadow, and at a convenient place
where the darkness was thickest, crossed the palisade.
To make assurance to Shura, I got upon my knees and hands and crawled without a sound
towards the corner of the house. As I drew nearer, my heart was suddenly and greatly
lightened. It is not a pleasant noise in itself, and I have often complained of it at other
times, but just then it was like music to hear my friends snoring together so loud and
peaceful in their sleep. The sea-cry of the watch, that beautiful all's well, never fell
more reassuringly on my ear.
In the meantime, there was no doubt of one thing. They had kept an infamous bad watch.
If it had been Silver and his lads that were now creeping in on them, not a soul would
have seen daybreak. That was what it was, thought I, to have had the captain wounded,
and again I blamed myself sharply for leaving them in that danger with so few to mount guard.
By this time I had got to the door and stood up. All was dark within, so that I could distinguish
nothing by the eye. As for sounds, there was the steady drone of the snorers and a small
occasional noise, a flickering or pecking that I could in no way account for.
With my arms before me, I walked steadily in. I should lie down in my own place, I thought
with a silent chuckle, and enjoy their faces when they found me in the morning.
My foot struck something yielding. It was a sleeper's leg, and he turned and groaned
without awaking. And then all of a sudden a shrill voice broke forth out of the darkness.
—Pieces of eight! Pieces of eight! Pieces of eight! Pieces of eight! Pieces of eight!
And so forth, without pause or change, like the clacking of a tiny mill.
Silver's green parrot, Captain Flint. It was she whom I had heard pecking at a piece of
bark. It was she keeping better watch than any human being, who thus announced my arrival
with her wearisome refrain. I had no time left to me to recover. At the sharp clipping
tone of the parrot, the sleepers awoke and sprang up, and with a mighty oath the voice
of Silver cried, Who goes? I turned to run, struck violently against one person, recoiled
and ran full into the arms of a second, who for his part closed upon and held me tight.
—Bring a torch, Dick! said Silver when my capture was thus assured.
And one of the men left the log-house, and presently returned with a lighted brand.